<h2 data-heading=\"book summary\">book summary<\/h2>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Fincancial 
success is not a hard science. It's a soft skill, where how you behave is \r\nmore 
important than what you know.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"No one's 
crazy\">No one's crazy<\/h3>\r\n<p>Everyone has their own unique experience with how the 
world works. Things that are \r\nexperienced theirself are more compelling than second-hand 
learned ones.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Your personal experiences with money make up maybe 
0.00000001% of what's happened in the \r\nworld, but maybe 80% of how you think the world 
works.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Studying history makes you feel like 
you understand something but until you've lived \r\nthrough it and personally felt its 
consequences, you may not understand it enough to change \r\nyour 
behavior.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>We all think we know how the world 
works. But we've all only experienced a tiny silver \r\nof 
it.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>People make decisions bases on their own unique 
experiences that seem to make sens to \r\nthem in a given moment so no one is 
crazy.<\/p>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Luck &amp; Risk\">Luck &amp; Risk<\/h3>\r\n<p>Luck and 
risk are so similar that believe in one without equally respecting the other is 
\r\nimpossible. They are both the reality that every outcome in life is guided by forces 
other \r\nthan individual effort.<\/p>\r\n<p>That both are so hard to measure makes them 
too often overlooked.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>If you give luck and risk their proper 
respect, you realize that when judging people's \r\nfinancial success \u2014 both your own 
and other's \u2014 it's never as good or as bad as it 
\r\nseems.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Only focussing on outcomes and what repeatable 
actions caused them and simultaneously \r\noverlook the role of random risk and luck that 
swayes those actions one way or the other \r\nbecause our brains prefer easy answers 
without much appetite for nuance makes identifying \r\nthe traits we should emulate or 
avoid agonizingly hard.<\/p>\r\n<p>This line between bold and reckless can be thin and gets 
often invisible when there is \r\nnot proper billing given to risk and 
luck.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The difficulty in identifying what is luck, what is skill, 
and what is risk is one of \r\nthe biggest problems we face when trying to learn about the 
best way to manage money.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>Be careful who you 
praise and admire. Be careful who you look down upon and \r\nwish to avoid 
becoming.<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>Just be careful when assuming that 100% of 
outcomes can be attributed to effort and 
\r\ndecisions.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>Therefore, focus less on specific individuals 
and case studies and more on \r\nbroad 
patterns.<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The more extreme the outcome, the 
less likely you can apply its lessons to your own \r\nlife, because the more likely the 
outcome was influenced by extreme ends of luck or \r\nrisk.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>To 
get closer to actionable takeaways look for broad common patterns of success and 
\r\nfailure, which makes them more applicable to your own life.<\/p>\r\n<p>Arrange your 
financial life in a way that risks won't wipe you out so you can keep \r\nplaying until the 
odds fall in your favor.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>As much as we recognize the role of 
luck in success, the role of risk means we should \r\nforgive ourselves and leave room for 
understanding when judging failures.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Never 
enough\">Never enough<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>There is no reason to risk what you have 
and need for what you don't have and don't 
\r\nneed.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>The hardest financial skill is 
getting the goalpost to stop \r\nmoving.<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>Expectations rise 
with results so there is no logic in striving for more because you'll \r\nfeel the same 
after putting in extra effort. Life isn't any fun without a sense of enough. \r\nHappiness 
is just results minus expectations.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>Social comparision is the 
problem here.<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The ceiling of social 
comparision is so high that virtually no one will ever hit it. \r\nWhich means it's a 
battle that can never be won, or that the only way to win is to not \r\nfight to begin with 
\u2014 to accept that you might have enough, even if it's less than those \r\naround 
you.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>\"Enough\" is not too 
little<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>The inability to deny a potential dollar will 
eventually catch up to you.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>There are many things never worth 
risking, no matter the potential \r\ngain<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>Such things are 
reputation, freedom and independence, family and friends, being loved by \r\nthose who you 
want to love you and happiness. You should know when it's time to stop risks \r\nthat might 
harm them.<\/p>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Confounding Compounding\">Confounding 
Compounding<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The point is that what seem like small changes in 
growth assumptions can lead to \r\nridiculous, impractical 
numbers.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>When compounding isn't intuitive its potential gets 
often ignored and solving problems \r\nhappens through focussing on other means. This 
danger is because we rarely stop to consider \r\ncompounding 
potential.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Good investing isn't necessarily about earning the 
highest returns, because the highest \r\nreturns tend to be one-off hits that can't be 
repeated. It's about earning pretty good \r\nreturns that you can stick with and which can 
be repeated for the longest period of time. \r\nThat's when compounding runs 
wild.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Getting wealthy vs. Staying 
wealthy\">Getting wealthy vs. Staying \r\nwealthy<\/h3>\r\n<p>There's only one way to stay 
wealthy: some combination of frugality and paranoia.<\/p>\r\n<p>To get money taking risks, 
being optimistic and putting yourself out there are abviously \r\nrequired on the one hand. 
Keeping money on the other hand requires the opposite of taking \r\nrisk, namely humility, 
and fear that what you've made can be taken away from you just as \r\nfast. Frugality and 
an acceptance that at least some of what've made is attributable to \r\nluck, so past 
success can't be relied upon to repeat indefinitely lets you staying 
\r\nwealthy.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The ability to stick around for a long time, 
without wiping out or being forced to give \r\nup, is what makes the biggest 
difference.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>A survival mentality is so key with money because 
few gains are so great that they're \r\nworth wiping yourself out over and getting and 
keeping that extraordinary growth requires \r\nsurviving all the unpredictable ups and 
downs that everyone inevitably experiences over \r\ntime.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Having 
an 'edge' and surviving are two different things: the first requires the second. \r\nYou 
need to avoid ruin. At all costs.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>Be 
financially unbreakable instead of wanting big returns. Then you are able to \r\nstick 
around long enough for compounding.<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>Compounding doesn't 
rely on earning the highest returns. Merely good returns sustained \r\nuninterrupted for 
the longest period if time \u2014 especially in time of chaos and havoc \u2014 will 
\r\nalways win.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>The most important part of every plan is to 
plan on the plan not going \r\naccording to plan.<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>Planning 
is important but only useful if it can survive reality. And a future filled \r\nwith 
unknown is everyone's reality. A good plan embraces unknowness and emphasizes room for 
\r\nerror.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Many bets fail not because they were wrong, but 
because they were mostly right in a \r\nsituation that required things to be exactly right. 
Room for error \u2014 often called \r\n<em>margin of safety<\/em> \u2014 is on of the most 
underappreciated forces in finance.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\u26A1 Margin of safety is 
raising the odds of success at a given level of risk by \r\nincreasing your chances of 
survival.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li><strong>Being optimistic about the future, but paranoid about 
what will prevent you \r\nfrom getting to the future is 
vital<\/strong><\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>A mindset that can be paranoid and 
optimistic at the same time is hard to maintain, \r\nbecause seeing things as black or 
white takes less effort than accepting nucance. But \r\nshort-term paranoia is needed to 
keep yourself alive long enough to exploit long-term 
\r\noptimism.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Tails, You Win\">Tails, You 
Win<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Long tails \u2014 the farthest ends of a distribution of 
outcomes \u2014 have tremendous influence \r\nin finance, where a small number of events 
can account for the majority of 
outcomes.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Anything that is huge, profitable, 
famous, or influential is the result of a tail event \r\n\u2014 an outlying 
one-in-thousands or millions event. And most of our attention goes to things \r\nthat are 
huge, profitable, famous, our 
influential.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Your success as an investor will 
be determined by how you respond to punctuated moments \r\nof terror, not the years spent 
on cruise control. A good definition of an investing genius \r\nis the man or woman who can 
do the average thing when all those around them are going \r\ncrazy. Tails drive 
everything.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>It's not wether you're right or 
wrong that's important, but how much money you make when \r\nyou're right and how much lose 
when you're wrong. \u2014 George Soros<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>You can 
be wrong half the time and still make a fortune.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 
data-heading=\"Freedom\">Freedom<\/h3>\r\n<p>Money's greates intrinsic value is its ability 
to give you control over your time. \r\nUnspent assets give you greater control over what 
you can do and when you can do it so it \r\nincreases your level of independence and 
autonomy.<\/p>\r\n<p>Using money to buy time and options is much more valuable than a few 
luxury goods.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Controlling your time is the highest dividend 
money pays.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Man in the Car Paradox\">Man in 
the Car Paradox<\/h3>\r\n<p>\uD83E\uDD11 People tend to want wealth to signal to others 
that they should be liked and admired. \r\nBut in reality those other people often bypass 
admiring you, not because they don't think \r\nwealth is admirable, but because they use 
your wealth as a benchmark for their own desidre \r\nto be liked and 
admired.<\/p>\r\n<p>Using money to buy fancy things may bring less respect and admiration 
that you would \r\nimagine first. You should be careful how you seek these 
goals.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Humility, kindness, and empathy will bring you more 
respect than horespower ever \r\nwill.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Wealth 
is What You Don't See\">Wealth is What You Don't See<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Spending 
money to show people how much money you have is the fastest way to have less 
\r\nmoney.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\uD83D\uDC40 We tend to judge wealth by what we 
see, because that's the information we have in \r\nfront of us. But the truth is that 
wealth is what you don't see. Wealth is financial assets \r\nthat haven't yet been 
converted into the stuff you see.<br>\r\n<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The only way to be 
wealthy is to not spend the money that you do have. It's not just the \r\nonly way to 
accumulate wealth; it's the very definition of wealth.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Wealth 
is hidden because it's income not spent. It's an option not yet taken to buy \r\nsomething 
later. Its value lies in offering options, flexibility, and growth to one day \r\npurcase 
more stuff than it would be possible right now.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The world is 
filled with people who look modest but are actually wealthy and people who \r\nlook rich 
who live at the razor's edge of insolvency.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 
data-heading=\"Save Money\">Save Money<\/h3>\r\n<p>Building wealth has little to do with 
your income or investment returns, and lots to do \r\nwith your savings 
rate.<\/p>\r\n<p>Personal savings and frugality are parts of the money equation that are 
more in your \r\ncontrol and are as effectice in the future as they are 
today.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Wealth is just the accumulated leftovers after you spend 
what you take in.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>More importantly, the value of wealth is 
relative to what you need. Learning to be happy \r\nwith less money creates a gap between 
what you have and what you want.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>There are professional 
investors who grind 80 hours a week to add a tenth of a \r\npercentage point to their 
returns when there are two or three full percentage points of \r\nlifestyle bloat in their 
finances that can be exploited with less effort.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Past a 
certain level of income one of the most powerful ways to increase your savings \r\nisn't to 
raise income but humility because you need what sits below your 
ego.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>People with enduring personal finance success \u2014 not 
necessarily those with high incomes \r\n\u2014 tend to have a propensity to not give a damn 
what others think about them.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>The less you care about what 
other think of you the less you will desire to the ability \r\nto save is more in your 
control than you might think.<\/p>\r\n<p>In a predictable world only saving for a specific 
goal makes sense but ours isn't. You \r\ndon't need a specific reason to 
save.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Saving is a hedge againts life's inevitable ability to 
surprise the hell out of you at \r\nthe worst possible 
moment.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Intangible benefits of money can be far more valuable 
and capable of increasing \r\nhappiness that tangible things that are abious targets of 
savings. Intangible stuff tend to \r\ngo unnoticed but savings without a spending goals 
generates options and flexibility, the \r\nability to wait and the opportunity to pounce, 
time to think and to change course on own \r\nterms.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Every bit 
of savings is like taking a point in the future that would have beeon owned by \r\nsomeone 
else and giving it back to yourself.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Don't having control over 
your time forces you to accept whatever bad luck is thrown \r\nyour way. With flexibility 
and the time to wait for opportunities to fall in your lap is \r\nthe hidden return on 
savings and it is becoming more important. Flexibility is a reliable \r\nadvantage in a 
world that's become connected as ours has not 
intelligence.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Having more control over your time and options is 
becoming one of the most valuable \r\ncurrencies in the 
world.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Reasonable > Rational\">Reasonable &gt; 
Rational<\/h3>\r\n<p>\uD83D\uDC9F Do not aim to be coldly rational when making financial 
decisions. Aim to just be \r\npretty reasonable. Reasonable is more realistic and you have 
a better chance of sticking \r\nwith it for the long run, which is what matters most when 
managing money.<\/p>\r\n<p>Investing's social component is often ignored when viewing is 
through a strictly \r\nfinancial lens.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>What's often overlooked 
in finance is that something can be technically true but \r\ncontextually 
nonsense.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Reasonable investors who love their technically 
imperfect strategies have an edge, \r\nbecause they're more likely to stick with those 
strategies and anything that keeps you in \r\nthe game has a quantifiable 
advantage.<\/p>\r\n<p>Feeling like you're part of something meaningful can be the necessary 
motivation in \r\ninvesting in a company.<\/p>\r\n<p>Day trading and individual stock 
picking is not rational for most investors because the \r\nodds are heavily against your 
success but they're both reasonable in small amounts if they \r\nlead to leave the rest of 
your more diversified investments alone.<\/p>\r\n<h3 
data-heading=\"Surprise!\">Surprise!<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Things that have never 
happened before happen all the time.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\u23F1 \"historians as 
prophets\" fallacy: An over reliance on past data is a signal to future \r\nconditions in a 
field where innovation and change are the lifeblood of progress.<\/p>\r\n<p>Investing is 
not a hard science because it's massive group of people making imperfect \r\ndecisions with 
limited information about things that will have a massive impact on their \r\nwellbeing, 
which can make even smart people nervous, greedy and 
paranoid.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Experiencing specific events does not necessarily 
qualify you to know what will happen \r\nnext. In fact it rarely does, because experience 
leads to overconfidence more than \r\nforecasting 
ability.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Realizing the future might not look 
anything like the past is a special kind of skill \r\nthat is not generally looked highly 
upon by the financial forecasting community.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\uD83D\uDE2F The 
correct lesson to learn from surprises is that the world is surprising. Not that \r\nwe 
should use past surprises as a guide to future boundaries; that we should use past 
\r\nsurprises as an admission that we have no idea what might happen next. Surprises moving 
the \r\nneedle the most is the one forecast that's been accurate at virtually every point 
in \r\nhistory.<br>\r\n<br>\r\nHistory doesn't account structural changes that are relevant 
to today's world to they can \r\nbe a misleading guide to the future, but that doesn't mean 
we should ignore history when \r\nthinking about money. The important nuance is that the 
further back in history we look, the \r\nmore general our takeaways should be (people's 
relationship to greed and fear, how they \r\nbehave under stress, and how they respond to 
incentives tend to be stable in time).<\/p>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Room for Error\">Room for 
Error<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>You have to give yourself room for error. You have to 
plan on your plan not going \r\naccording to 
plan.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Acknowledging that unvertainty, randomness, and chance 
are ever-present part of life is \r\nthe wisdom in having room for 
error.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>To only way to deal with them is by increasing the gap 
between what you think will \r\nhappen and what can happen while still leaving you capable 
of fighting another day.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\u2757 Margin of safety \u2014 you 
can also call it room for error or redundancy \u2014 is the only \r\neffective way to 
safely navigate a world that is governed by odds, not certainties. And \r\nalmost 
everything related to money exists in that kind of world.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Margin 
of safety is a simple suggestion that we don't need to view the world in front of \r\nus as 
black or white, predictable or crapshoot. The gray area \u2014 pursuing things where a 
\r\nrange of potential outcomes are acceptable \u2014 is the smart way to 
proceed.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>It lets you endure a range of potential outcomes, and 
endurance lets you stick long \r\nenough to let the odds of benefiting from a 
low-probability outcome fall in your favor.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Having a gap between 
what you can technically endure versus what's emotionally possible \r\nis an overlooked 
version of room for error.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>A gap gives you emotional safety to 
not become exhausted when financial losses \r\nhappen.<\/p>\r\n<p>Also use room for error 
in predictions when estimating future returns which is more art \r\nthan 
science.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The best way to achieve felicity is to aim low \u2014 
Charlie Munger<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>The core idea is that taking risks to get ahead 
is possible, but no risk that can wipe \r\nyou out is ever worth taking. Just ensure that 
you can remain standing long enough for your \r\nrisks to pay off. You have to survive to 
succeed.<\/p>\r\n<p>Avoiding all kinds of unknown risks is impossible because you can't 
prepare for what you \r\ncan't envision. If there's one way to protect against their damage 
it would be avoiding \r\nsingle points of failure.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>A good rule 
of thumb for a lot of things in life is that everything that can break will \r\neventually 
break.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"You'll change\">You'll 
change<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>An underpinning of psychology is that people are poor 
forecasters of their future \r\nselves.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Therefore it's very 
hard to make enduring long-term decision when your view of what \r\nyou'll want in the 
future is very likely to shift.<\/p>\r\n<p>As a result we should avoid the extreme ends of 
financial planning.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Endurance is key. And when you consider our 
tendency to change who we are over time, \r\nbalance at every point in your life becomes a 
strategy to avoid future regret and encourage 
\r\nendurance.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>And we should also come to accept the reality 
of changing our minds.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Sunk costs \u2014 anchoring decisions to 
past efforts that can't be rufunded \u2014 are a devil in \r\na world where people change 
over time. They make our future selves prisoners to our past, \r\ndifferent, selves. It's 
the equivalent of a stranger making major life decisions for 
\r\nyou.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Embracing the idea that financial 
goals made when you were a different person should be \r\nabandoned without mercy versus 
put on life support and dragged on can be a good strategy to \r\nminimize future 
regret.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"Nothing's Free\">Nothing's 
Free<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Most things are harder in practice than they are in 
theory.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Like everything else worthwhile, 
successful investing demands a price. But its currency \r\nis not dollars and cents. It's 
volatility, fear, doubt, uncertainty, and regret \u2014 all of \r\nwhich are easy to 
overlook until you're dealing with them in real time.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>The 
irony is that by trying to avoid the price by buying and selling, investors end up 
\r\npaying double.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The price of investing success is not 
immediately obvious. Market returns are never free \r\nand never will be. They demand you 
pay a price, like any other product.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>You'll get usually what 
you pay for in markets. The price for returns (volatility, \r\nuncertainity, fee) is the 
cost of admission to get returns greater than low-fee parks (like \r\ncash and 
bonds).<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The trick is convincing yourself that the market's fee 
is worth it. That's the only way \r\nto properly deal with volatility and uncertainty 
\u2014 not just putting up with it, but \r\nrealizing that it's an admission fee worth 
paying.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"You &amp; Me\">You &amp; 
Me<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Investors often innocently take cues from other investors 
who are playing a different \r\ngame than they are.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>But you 
should be careful. When investors have different goals and time horizons prices \r\nthat 
look ridiculous to one person can make sense to another, because the factors those 
\r\ninvestors pay attention to are different.<\/p>\r\n<p>\uD83D\uDCC8 An iron rule of 
finance is that money chases returns to the greatest extent that it 
\r\ncan.<br>\r\n<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The formation of bubbles isn't so much about 
people irrationally participating in \r\nlong-term investing. They're about people somewhat 
rationally moving toward short-term \r\ntrading to capture momentum that had been feeding 
on itself. Bubbles do their damage when \r\nlong-term investors playing on game start 
taking their cues from those short-term traders \r\nplaying 
another.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Many finance and investment decisions are rooted in 
watching other people's behavior and \r\neither copying it or betting against it. But when 
you don't know why someone behaves like \r\nthey do you won't know how long they'll 
continue acting that way, or what will make them \r\nchange their 
mind.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>It's hard to grasp that other investors have different 
goals than we do, because an \r\nanchor of psychology is not realizing that rational people 
can see the world through a \r\ndifferent lens than your 
own.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Being swayed by people playing a 
different game can also throw off how you think you're \r\nsupposed to spend your 
money.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\u23F3 Few things matter more with money than 
understanding your own time horizon and not \r\nbeing persuaded by the actions and 
behaviors of people playing different games than you \r\nare. Identify what game you're 
playing.<\/p>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"The Seduction of Pessimism\">The Seduction of 
Pessimism<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Pessimism isn't just more common that optimism it 
also sounds smarter. It's \r\nintellectually captivating, and it's paid more attention than 
optimism, which is often \r\nviewed as being oblivious to risk. Pessimism just sounds 
smarter and more plausible than \r\noptimism.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>\uD83D\uDE0C 
Optimism is a belief that the odds of a good outcome are in your favor over time, \r\neven 
when there will be setbacks along the way.<\/p>\r\n<p>Things which make financial pessimism 
easy, common, and more persuasive than \r\noptimism:<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li>Money is 
ubiquitous, so something bad happening tends to affect everyone and captures \r\neveryone's 
attention.<\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>It's a connected system where one person's decision can 
affect everyone else and \r\ntherefore it's understandable why financial risks gain a 
spotlight and capture attention in \r\na way few other topics 
can.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li>Another is that pessimists often extrapolate present trends 
without accounting for how \r\nmarkets adapt<\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>\uD83D\uDCC9 There is an 
iron law in economics: extremely good and extremely bad circumstances \r\nrarely stay that 
way for long because supply and demand adapt in hard-to-predict ways.<\/p>\r\n<p>Problems 
correct and people adapt. Threats incentivize solutions in equal 
magnitude.<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li>A third is that progress happens too slowly to notice, but 
setbacks happen to quickly \r\nto ingore.<\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Growth is 
driven by compounding, which always takes time. Destruction is driven by \r\nsingle points 
of failure, which can happen in seconds, and loss of confidence, which can \r\nhappen in an 
instant.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>This underscores that in investing you must indetify 
the price of success \u2014 volatility \r\nand loss amid the long backdrop of growth \u2014 
and be willing to pay it.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Expecting things to be great means a 
best-case scenario that feels flat. Pessimism \r\nreduces expectations, narrowing the gap 
between possible outcomes and outcomes you feel \r\ngreat about. Maybe that's why it's so 
seductive. Expecting things to be bad is the best way \r\nto be pleasantly surprised when 
they're not.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"When You'll Believe 
Anything\">When You'll Believe Anything<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Stories are, by far, 
the most powerful force in the economy. They are the fuel that can \r\nlet the tangible 
parts of the economy work, or the brake that holds our capabilities 
\r\nback.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<p>Things to keep in mind about a story-driven world 
when managing your money:<\/p>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li>The more you want something to be true, the 
more likely you are to believe a story that \r\noverestimates the odds of it being 
true.<\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>\"Appealing fictions\" are things in life that we think are 
true because we desperately \r\nwant them to be true. They happen when you are smart, you 
want to find solutions, but face \r\na combination of limited control and high stakes. They 
are extremely powerful because they \r\ncan make you believe just about 
anything.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The bigger the gap between that you want to be true 
and what you need to be true to have \r\nan acceptable outcome, the more you are protecting 
yourself from falling victim to an \r\nappealing financial 
fiction.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>The biggest risk is that you want 
something to be true so badly that the range of your \r\nforecast isn't even in the same 
ballpark as reality.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Incentives are a powerful 
motivatior, and we should always remember how they influence \r\nour own financial goals 
and outlooks. It can't be overstated: there is no greater force in \r\nfinance than room 
for error, and the higher the stakes, the wider it should 
be.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<ul>\r\n<li>Everyone has an incomplete view of the world. But 
we form a complete narrative to fill \r\nin the gaps.<\/li>\r\n<\/ul>\r\n<p>People come up 
with explanations that makes sense based on their own unique perspective \r\nand 
experiences in the world, when being confronted with something they don't understand so 
\r\nthey do not realize they don't understand it.<\/p>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>We all want 
the complicated world we live in to make sense. So we tell ourselves stories \r\nto fill in 
the gaps of what are effectively blind 
spots.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Comming to terms with how much you 
don't know means coming to terms with how much of \r\nwhat happens in the world it out of 
your control. And that can be hard to 
accept.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>Wwanting to believe we are in control 
is an amotional itch that needs to be scratched, \r\nrather than an analytical problem to 
be calculated and solved. The illusion of control is \r\nmore persuasive than the reality 
of uncertainty. So we cling to stories about outcomes \r\nbeing in our 
control.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>We don't wander around blind and 
confused. We have to think the world we operate in \r\nmakes sense based on what we happen 
to know.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<h3 data-heading=\"All Together Now\">All Together 
Now<\/h3>\r\n<p>Although there exists universal truths in money, people come to different 
conclusion \r\nabout how they want to apply those to their own 
finances.<\/p>\r\n<ol>\r\n<li>Go out of your way to find humility when things are going 
right and \r\nforgiveness\/compassion when they go wrong.<\/li>\r\n<li>Less ego, more 
wealth.<\/li>\r\n<li>Manage your money in a way that helps you sleep at 
night.<\/li>\r\n<li>If you want to do better as an investor, the single most powerful thing 
you can do is \r\nincrease your time horizon.<\/li>\r\n<li>Become OK with a lot if things 
going wrong. you can be wrong half the time and still \r\nmake a fortune.<\/li>\r\n<li>Use 
money to gain control over your time.<\/li>\r\n<li>Be nicer and less 
flashy.<\/li>\r\n<li>Save. Just save. You don't need a specific reason to 
save.<\/li>\r\n<li>Define the cost of success and be ready to pay it.<\/li>\r\n<li>Worship 
room for error.<\/li>\r\n<li>Avoid the extreme ends of financial 
decisions.<\/li>\r\n<li>You should like risk because it pays off over 
time.<\/li>\r\n<li>Define the game you're playing.<\/li>\r\n<li>Respect the 
mess.<\/li>\r\n<\/ol>\r\n<h3 
data-heading=\"Confessions\">Confessions<\/h3>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>There is no universal 
truth. There's only what works for you and your family, checking \r\nthe boxes you want 
checked in a way that leaves you comfortable and sleeping well at 
\r\nnight.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n<blockquote>\r\n<p>What works for one person may not 
work for another. You have to find what works for \r\nyou.<\/p>\r\n<\/blockquote>\r\n
